okay good morning everyone let's dive
back in uh couple of orienting remarks
before we get back to the next challenge
in evolutionary robotics undergrads you
are uh about to start in on the 10th and
final assignment so you're nearing the
end I just linked it in there uh now
through assignments 1 through n we've
tried to keep everything as simple as
possible so in the spirit of the minimal
cognition experiments you've had a
minimally complex robot Three Links Two
Joints a minimal complement of sensors a
minimal complement of Motors no hidden
layer just a few neurons as few synapses
as possible simplest possible
environment you can imagine for the
robot an infinite flat plane and we've
been using relatively simple optimizers
very low powerered simpl to code up
evolutionary algorithm in assignment n
so everything has been minimal minimal
simple simple simple all the way along
until assignment 10 in assignment 10
you're going to go in and make your
robot more complicated there's only so
much we can do with the three link
two-joint robot so you're going to
replace that very very simple robot with
uh the quadraped which is made up of
eight links and sorry nine links and
nine joints still not very complicated
but it gets easy to get lost pretty
quickly in assignment 10 you remember
our discussion about absolute and
relative coordinates when we were doing
the joints assignment that gets very
confusing when we start to play around
with more and more links and Joints so
my advice to you if you haven't tackled
assignment 10 yet is to do everything
incrementally add one link and connect
that new link with a joint to your GR gr
robot debug the position and orientation
of that link the position uh of the
joint make sure the joint normal is
correct there's a temptation to add all
the Links at once and and connect them
all up with joints cross your fingers
hit compile and hope for the best you
all are probably sufficiently
experienced coders by now to know what
happens when you do things in that
manner so take your time do things
incrementally in assignment 10 and when
we reconvene here uh when we reconvene
here next Tuesday
Morning uh the undergraduates and those
taking this course for graduate credit
you will have done with all the weekly
assignments and you will be on your own
for the rest of the semester so next
Tuesday we will talk about final
projects how to navigate the final
project how to do well what's worked for
students in the past what hasn't worked
for students in the past uh and so on
all
good okay graduate students uh you are
about to also tackle the very final
assignment which is the fifth and final
differentiable assignment which I
haven't finished coding up yet I was
hoping to finish last night I am racing
to stay one week ahead of all the grad
students in this class I'm falling a
little bit behind I will put it up
around 3:00 this afternoon which means
for The Graduate students D5 will be due
at 3 P.M next Tuesday I will still give
you a week to work on it fair okay I
know everybody's busy myself included
we'll get there any questions about
assignments the differentiable
assignments all good okay all right so
uh we are working our way through open
challenges open problems in the field of
evolutionary robotics uh we looked at
modularity or lack of modularity we
looked at the competing convention
problem and the solution to the
competing conventions problem which was
neat and then we looked we ended last
time by looking at hyperne which is a
solution to a different problem what's
the problem that hyperne helps to
solve if you remember why hypernet was
designed it's basic the basic idea
underneath hypernet what does it help
with
regular behaviors or shapes whatever you
want regular behaviors regular shapes we
are bilaterally symmetrically shaped the
left side of our body looks like the
right side of our body because that
helps with a particular regular behavior
that is important to us which is usually
bilateral uh Locomotion as by bipedal
locomotion in the direction in which our
primary sensors face right so if you
look across nature organisms are not
random collections of body parts and
they don't move in some random
uncoordinated way there is regular
pattern over time in the behavior of
organisms and there is regular spatial
ordering in our bodies and also in our
brains so hypernet was designed to bias
evolutionary search Evol hypernet is
still an evolutionary algorithm we're
searching among the space of all
possible things could be neural
controllers for robots robot body plans
themselves but hypernet tends to focus
search in one part of the fitness
landscape and it's that part of the
fitness landscape in which can be found
regular patterns okay today we are going
to start in on arguably the biggest the
hardest and the as yet unsolved problem
in the field of evolution and Robotics
and many other branches of Robotics
which is it's not that difficult to
evolve or train a simulated robot in a
simulated environment if you've just
finished assignment nine you've had a
little bit of experience with that it's
not trivial but it's not that difficult
once you have something in simulation
that works you have a robot that does
something useful and presumably safe for
humans to be around how do we take that
robot and transfer it to reality and
Ensure or guarantee that the physical
counterpart the physical robot is going
to exhibit that safe useful interesting
entertaining behavior in the real world
that is known as crossing the reality
Gap and uh this has been an open problem
since the beginning of evolutionary
robotics the early 90s but arguably
going back even earlier than that and
again although some people think they
have good solutions to this problem
like Nvidia I would argue that it is
still a difficult problem to
solve okay in this segment we're going
to look at four different projects four
different attempts to cross the reality
Gap they're all very different there are
many many more attempted solutions to
cross the reality Gap than just these
four I picked them to be a
representative sample we're going to go
back and look at uh the first one in
evolutionary robotics which was
published at the beginning of the field
uh in the 9s and the basic idea behind
this very first attempt to cross the
reality Gap is to sprinkle a lot of
noise into the simulation itself so that
Evolution cannot latch on and exploit
some feature of the simulated robot or
its simulated environment that is
constant that doesn't change inside the
simulation but isn't real in reality
there are many of these constant
features in your simulators that don't
exist in reality what are some of
them at the end of assignment now you
should have a minimal minimally complex
creature running around in a simulated
environment which is pretty fake fake in
which way which ways there are many is
like flat absolutely right this carpet
looks pretty flat it's not other
features of the environment that are not
real if you were to take if you got a
nice gate for your three-link robot and
I gave you a Lego construction kit and
some Motors to actually build it in
reality what's going to literally or
maybe metaphorically trip trip up the
physical counterpart of your evolved
robot LS can go each other the
absolutely the parts the links the parts
of the robot can
interpenetrate not allowed in reality
unless we build the parts out of like
Nerf or foam and then we could argue
that interpenetration is kind of okay
because it's soft but what else what
other rules of this universe is your
physics engine
violating absolutely so if you're
prototyping a robot for NASA and we're
saying this is moving around on a on a a
comet or a meteor uh or it's moving
around in a vacuum with no wind no air
pressure no oxygen then okay fine but
not on this
planet other things that are not
real oh it's got discreet time steps
discrete time steps also not true right
so from the point of view of your robot
it doesn't have a camera but it's got
touch sensors it's basically closing its
eyes and then it suddenly teleports a
small distance in its world and then
closes its eyes and teleports again we
can make those moments of
unconsciousness very very brief but
they're still
there
you you may have seen this in assignment
9 you'll definitely start to see it in
assignment 10 as always Evolution
regardless of whether she is biological
or artificial is a satisfies her she
will exploit whatever she's given what
uh inaccurate features of the simulator
have you seen your robots start to
exploit
this one's a little trickier is your
robot exploiting the fact that it's
using through a moving through a
vacuum not really right there's not
literally nothing in a vacuum with of
which to
exploit doesn't
toter but also absolutely right so there
is some friction set in your in the
ground floor it's relatively low at the
moment so it's like moving over lenium
or maybe like rough ice it there's a
little bit of friction but not much and
you can see that the robot tends to
evolve in many cases like walking on
tippy toes takes lots of many small
steps which is actually maybe not a bad
strategy if you're moving over low
friction but it's definitely exploiting
that fact and if we took that robot and
built it in reality out of Lego and put
it on this High friction carpet that
strategy is probably not going to work
very well and your robot would fail to
cross the reality
Gap when we do more complex simulations
like you see the Nvidia one here there
are many there are much there's much
more physical detail in the physics
engine and in the construction of the
simulated robot itself and a lot of
those details are actually inaccurate or
completely inaccurate and there's more
opportunities for an evolutionary
algorithm to exploit all all of those
inaccuracies so how do we keep
artificial Evolution from exploiting
things that don't exist in the real
world in the simulator how do we keep
her from doing that but make sure that
she does focus on evolving or tuning or
optimizing those aspects of the robot
and its interaction with the environment
so that the robot does what it's
supposed to
do that's what we're going to look at in
this first experiment it's an old idea
and Nvidia has convinced themselves that
they rediscovered it in 2018 and you can
see that idea visualized in this
screenshot what's the
trick like every possible situation
every possible situation so it may be
difficult to see from the screenshot if
you're in the back they're trying to
trade a robot arm to pick up this or or
to hang this yellow cylinder on a string
and drop the cylinder into the hole in
the blue
cube and if you give one robot arm one
string one cylinder and one blue cube it
will learn to do it by exploiting some
aspect of the actual geometry of that
one yellow cylinder the geometry of that
one blue cube that's not what you want
to train the robot to do you're not
trying and video is not trying to train
the robot to drop that cylinder into
this Cube It's to drop cylinders into
cubes so pretty makes sense right very
intuitive train it on a whole bunch of
different situations so you'll notice
that there are all sorts of different
cubes there are holes in these Cubes at
different relative positions the holes
are bigger or smaller the cylinders are
bigger and smaller basically force it to
generalize across all these
instances so that if Nvidia takes one of
the neural controllers that results from
this experiment in simulation and drops
it into a physical robot arm from the
point of view of that neural controller
it's experiencing yet one more cylinder
and cube with a hole in it right just
one more case it's just from our
perspective it's a it's a particularly
unique case it's the first real cylinder
and real Cube that the real robot has
experienced but from the point of view
of the neural controller it's just
another situation yeah okay so you can
see from this picture what's being
varied what's not being varied in this
picture the robot itself is the same
yeah the
environment the EnV the environment
itself right it's all a flat floor so
there's features of the environment that
are invariant here but mostly it's the
robot that stays the same remember our
discussion about Rene dayart way back
the beginning of the course divide body
and brain body doesn't matter let's
forget about the body you look at modern
robotics you can see that all the time
right the focus here is on the neural
controller that they're training and the
environment of the robot the cylinders
and the cubes they've forgotten about
the robot's body
itself there's the simulated robot's
body you can imagine the physical
robot's body looks more or less
identical to
that is it likely to be identical the
simulated robot arm and the physical
robot
arm okay most of you are students of
embodied cognition right now you know
that they may look similar but there's
bound to be mechanical differences
between the simulated robot and the
physical robot no matter how accurate
the simulator is and no matter how many
fancy High futin gpus we run this
simulator on there's bound to be
differences the reality Gap is is tricky
it's
significant okay all right so let's go
back in time to 1997 towards the
beginning of evolutionary Robotics and
uh at that time as this field was
starting this idea of evolving uh robots
and simulation and then transferring
them to reality was starting to occur to
folks and already there was people were
starting to realize there's going to be
a problem whatever we evolve in
simulation how do we transfer that uh to
reality now this is a little tricky
because physics engines didn't exist in
1997 actually they did exist they were
being coded up at uh games companies but
they hadn't been released to the general
public
yet before there were physics engines
there were simpler models that we people
were using and we're going to look at
some of those simpler models today so
throughout today's lecture I'm going to
talk about simulation and for most of
that most of us that sort of equates
with physical simulation the physics
engines that you're working with those
didn't exist yet we're going to just use
simulation as a catchall term for some
simplified computational model in which
we can do Evolution and then try and
transfer stuff to a real
robot okay all right so the the
observation back at that that time will
was Evolution artificial Evolution will
probably create neural controllers that
are going to exploit details of the
simulation perverse instantiation has
been known uh in Ai and Robotics for a
very long time uh that's another problem
obviously related to the reality Gap so
if evolution exploits the details in
this simulation and those details don't
exist in the reality we have the reality
Gap what whatever evolves in simulation
is unlikely to transfer to re uh to
reality so the hypothesis that was
tested in this paper is to add noise to
the simulator and for our purposes noise
is going to be every time you construct
and run a simulation randomly alter one
or more features of the
simulator but what features do you
decide to add noise to to ensure
that evolution is not going to exploit
details uh incorrect
details and then you won't be able to
transfer to reality we could add noise
to everything place the robot in high
wind every step it takes across the
ground is ice then sandpaper then
Boulders uh then loose sand then shallow
water we could add tons of noise to
every feature you could imagine the
robot's body changes is at every time
step it's Mass distribution is being
juggled from time step to time step just
if we don't know what kind of noise to
add let's just throw tens uh let's just
throw tons of noise at the simulator
what's going to
happen evolution is certainly not going
to be able to latch on to any constant
detail and exploit it to evolve the
behavior we want in simulation that's
good what's the
problem won't evolve to do anything it
won't evolve to do anything you can try
this yourself with your setup now
artificial Evolution will say I'm just
going to keep the robot where it is it's
too windy it's too noisy the robot keeps
changing I can't find any way to climb
any Hill in the fitness landscape so
there's a balancing act here there's a
goldilock zone between adding too much
noise
so that Evolution can't make any
progress in
simulation and adding too little noise
so that Evolution starts exploiting
facts uh invariance in the simulation
that have no correspondence in reality
yeah okay so there's a question then
that arises in this hypothesis which
intuitively makes sense which aspects of
the simulation do we
noisy and the more complex the simulator
there it is
the more things we have to decide to
noisy or not friction of the ground the
mass distribution of the robot's body
its geometry the geometry of the robot
itself the properties of the joints the
properties of the sensors the properties
of the motors properties of the
batteries on and on and on we go so this
sounds terrifying because the more we
want our robot to do the more
complicated a simulator we need to
evolve it to do that the more decisions
we need to make about what to noisy and
what not so the solution that the
authors came up with the author came up
with back in 97 was minimal simulation
what is the simplest possible simulation
we can make uh and the minimal
simulation inspired some of the minimal
cognition experiments that we saw last
month they're related okay so we're
going to be looking at a minimal
simulation now contains as little detail
as possible but enough that Evolution
evolves something that transfers to
reality okay so how are they going to do
this they're going to think about how to
create a simulator for their robot first
and they're going to think about all the
physical details that might exist in
that Simulator the mass of the robot
gravity friction wind resistance air
pressure and they're going to take all
of those physical details and drop it
into one of two buck buets the first
bucket is the base set of robot
environment interactions so you can
think of one inter one type one kind of
robot interaction is Collision detection
and
resolution friction is a part of that
that uh detail so in the base set these
are things that we might get wrong so
friction definitely exists in the real
world so we want to put friction into
the simulator we might not know how much
friction to add but some kind of
friction needs to be in the simulator so
that goes into the base set those are
things that we might get wrong but they
need to be in there they're important if
the robot has no friction it's going to
go nowhere in simulation no matter how
smart evolution is the second bucket is
basically artifacts they call this the
impl implementation set of interactions
it's not a very uh good term in my
opinion implementation meaning to
implement the simulator they needed to
put it in there but it has absolutely no
basis in reality completely different
from
reality what are some things we kind of
have to put in the simulator but have
absolutely no basis in reality this is
not so obvious to think of examples
here any
ideas is it again
we need to like have some sort of
surface we need to have some sort of
surface that would probably go in the
base set we might not get the friction
right and no floor is perfectly flat but
yeah we probably need a
floor everything being a perfect shape
yeah that that certainly something we
can't get we can't get right what we're
going to see in a moment is what one
example of an implementation set are the
sensors so we've talked about uh we've
talked about infrared sensors in this
class sonar sensors things that send out
a signal that hit something in the
environment and bounce back and the time
it takes for that signal to go out and
come back to the robot or in the case of
organisms for a bat for example when it
sends out sonar getting the details of
all of those signals going out and
hitting something and bouncing back
correctly as it does in the real world
it's it's impossible we could take all
the computers on the planet at the
moment and dedicate them to simulating
one pulse of sonar and we wouldn't be
able to to simulate it very well it's
basically impossible to simulate that
well so how an infrared sensor behaves
in uh is would probably be dumped into
the second bucket any detail that
Evolution starts to exploit about how an
infrared sensor works on a simulated
robot if it's exploiting that fact
that's a bad bad thing Evolution's
getting addicted to something that's not
going to exist in reality or it's going
to exist but it's going to be so
different from whatever we simulate we
shouldn't simulate it so seem sounds
like a catch 22 right we want to evolve
a robot with infrared sensors but we
can't simulate the infrared sensors what
do we do this is actually tricky okay so
we're going to see how this works so
what they're going to do in this
experiment they're going to run things
in a not a physics engine but a simpler
uh simulated world for their robot and
they're going to sprinkle noise on a
whole bunch of different things they're
going to sprinkle tons of noise on the
things that they know that they can't
Implement well like how infrared Sensors
refle how infrared light reflects back
to the robot they're going to put 100%
noise on that and they're going to put
only a little bit of noise on the base
set so going back to this picture here
the Nvidia folks know that the physical
robot is going to encounter cylinders
and boxes with holes in them so vary the
cylinders and the boxes a little bit in
this experiment it was 10% an arbitrary
number yeah so they're basically
poisoning some aspects of the simulator
that Evolution should not latch on to
and varying mildly the things that it
should exploit so that it generalizes to
those features what does 100% of noise
mean yeah we'll I'll give you an example
in a moment yeah okay we we'll see what
100% basically it's every time the robot
encounters an instance of that
phenomenon it's completely
different okay we'll see an example in a
moment okay so uh you might recognize
this robot it's not the Roomba roombas
didn't exist yet although roombas were
inspired by this robot
anybody
remember the Kea robot the hockey puck
type robot just to refresh your memory
we've got six infrared sensors on the
front two infrared sensors on the back
and two ambient I'm sorry this should
say ambient light sensors so ambient
meaning these sensors are not
directional they're just picking up the
ambient light level around that sensor
infrared sensors again they send out a
pulse of infrared light and the sensor
measures the amount of time for the
pulse to come back the longer it takes
for that pulse to come back the further
away is the object that that caus the
infrared beam to bounce back to the
robot yeah okay two wheels two wheels on
a robot so eight uh I'm sorry eight plus
two sensors 10 sensors plus two
Motors they're going to evolve this
robot in a simulator to solve a very old
problem taken from psychology
psychologists love to put rats in mazes
as we all know this is the maze this is
the t- maze we're going to place a robot
in the te- Maze but imagine we put a rat
in the te- Maze instead we put the rat
in the base of the tea the rat starts
wandering around and if it wanders far
enough up the stem of the tea suddenly a
light will flash either from uh through
the wall to the right of the rat or a
light will flash through the wall to the
left of the Rat and then the light will
blink off
again if the rat continues to wander up
into the junction of the tea and turns
in the direction in which it had seen
the light there's going to be a piece of
lovely cheese waiting for it on that
side and sure enough if you do this
experiment with rats long enough and
randomly Flash the light on the right or
the left over and over and over again
the rat will tend to stop turning left
or right with 50% chance at the junction
it will tend to turn in the direction in
which it saw the light from which you
can conclude that the rat is capable of
memory it remembers on which side it saw
the light and when it gets to the
junction it knows I should turn in that
direction and get the cheese we can uh
throw away the rat and take organism X
and do the same experiment and over time
if organism X or species X starts to
turn in the right direction more often
than not we can conclude that that
particular species is capable of
memory make sense seems great right it's
a test of memory or whether you can
learn to hold use short-term memory
thinking about thinking
is difficult dangerous this experiment
is flawed you do not need to remember in
order to solve the
te-as you were all students of embodied
cognition how if we put you in the Maze
and you hadn't had your morning coffee
and you didn't feel like trying to
remember which side you saw the light
on there's an easier way to Sol this
task fantastic it took you all less than
60 seconds to see the flaw in this 100y
old psychology experiment right the
minute you start thinking about the body
or the interaction of the body with the
environment suddenly this becomes
trivial I see the light and I learn or I
discover that if I just touch the wall
where I saw the light and then I just
keep going I don't need to remember
where I Saw the Light When I get to the
junction whichever wall I'm holding on
to I turn in that direction so they're
going to evolve this keera robot with a
little neural controller inside that
connects the 10 sensors to the two
Motors they're going to evolve it to
solve the teamas and if they put some
recurrent Connections in here maybe the
evolutionary algorithm will evolve
memory for the robot or maybe evolution
will ReDiscover this solution yeah
there's multiple ways to solve this task
okay so we're going to evolve the robot
to do this we know the robot we know the
sensors we know the motors wire them up
we now need a fitness function so we're
going to create a fitness function as
follows every time we drop a robot with
a given neural controller into the base
of the te-as we let it run around in the
te-as in simulation for 10 seconds and
then at the end of the 10 seconds we
measure D1 and D2 D1 how far did it
travel up the stem of the t- Maze We
want to obviously reward robots for
traveling up the stem if they stay at
the uh if they stay at the base of the
tea that's no good we also want to
evolve them when they get to the
junction to move uh along either to the
left or the right so we're going to also
reward for d two which is the amount uh
of distance they travel either in the
upper right part of the T or the upper
left part of the
T so basically reward for travel and
then they get an extra 100 points if the
robot happened to turn in the right
direction at the junction pretty
straightforward right okay we have a
population of random neural controllers
we drop each neural controller onto our
simul ated robot in the t- multiple
times and for each neural controller we
drop it into the simulated robot
multiple times and randomly Flash the
light at the left or the right and sum
up this term sum up this equation for
multiple evaluations of the same neural
controller that's the fitness of that
controller run our evolutionary
algorithm delete neural controllers with
low Fitness make randomly modified
copies of the surviving
controllers and you can imagine it
doesn't take very long to evolve a
neural controller for the simulated Kea
robot to solve the te-as I now give you
the physical Kea robot you download your
most fit neural controller onto that
physical Kea I give you a physical
tze what do you think the chances are
that that physical Kea is going to do
the right
thing we wouldn't be talking about this
if it did the right thing usually it
doesn't okay so the hard part here is
not formulating the fitness function
making the simulator coming up with a
good way to evolve weights and all the
rest of it it's how do we ensure that it
evolves to solve the task yet doesn't
glom on to any details of our simulator
that are
incorrect so they're going to start to
sprinkle noise into this situation
here's the first strong hint about what
they're going to do they're not even
going to simulate a tze they're going to
simulate the stem of the te in phase one
and if any given neural controller
drives the robot sufficiently high up
the stem of the te they're going to
teleport the robot into the center of
the intersection and then measure
D2 they are not simulating the
intersection itself why
not it just hug the wall it could hug
the wall but that's perfectly valid here
hugging the simulated wall and hug
hugging the real wall perfectly valid
the walls might be slightly different in
reality that's okay the friction if it
does touch the wall and assuming we
simulate a wall with a little bit of
friction that friction or the
interaction with the wall would probably
go in the base set the walls are going
to exist in simulation and reality
what detail of this environment is
probably going to be very very very
different between simulation and
reality the fact that they're not
simulating the intersection at all is a
strong hint there's something about the
intersection that is particularly
problematic particularly inacurate
Rob not necessarily no as the robot
travels up the stem of the simulated or
real teamas the intersection is
approaching in simulation and
reality is it the Gap in time between l
a light and like because it just
teleports to the center it'll po
immediately or something uh no not
necessarily so we're we're going to if
the robot uh if the robot has large D1
or a particular controller achieves High
D1 that controller is driving the robot
all the way up the stem of the tea past
the light it's seen the light the light
is turned off all good then it
teleports
it it could be we're getting close right
something about the geometry of the tze
relative to the
robot no okay okay we'll come back to
that then okay let's talk about the
simulation itself I I kind of mentioned
the t- this is three years before
physics engines were existed the
simulator in this case is an Excel
spreadsheet it's a lookup table sounds
crazy right turns out you can do it here
we go this is about as minimal as you
can get this is the simplest simulator
you're going to see in this entire
course there are two tables in this
Excel spreadsheet did Excel even exist
back then I guess so anyways okay table
one uh it's basically a lookup table so
in that lookup table we take um we take
the robot's
orientation what angle is the robot
currently facing so you can imagine 360
rows in this lookup table one for each
angle that the robot could be at uh each
each degree of orientation that the
robot could be at which is visualized by
these arrows here and we take the forces
arriving at the two motor neurons
remember this neural controller has two
motor neurons that's trying to send
torque to turn the wheels there's no
simulated wheels so what do you do with
the motor neurons
if both motor neurons are firing with
positive values that's the motor neurons
trying to spin both Wheels forward and
move the robot
forward you could have one motor neuron
firing with a negative value and with
the second motor neuron firing with a
positive number and that's the neural
controller trying to spin the left wheel
back and the right wheel forward so
we've got these 360 rows we can imagine
actually many more than 360 rows where
we have now three columns we have the
angle the robot is facing the value of
the first motor neuron and the value of
the second motor
neuron the motor neuron values are
floating Point values so we could have
an infinite number of rows so let's
discretize this a little
bit so basically we're going to this
table and we have our neural controller
we know the current angle of the robot
we know what the two values are that
have just arrived at the motor the two
motor neurons we go look up those three
numbers in table
one and there are two additional columns
the fourth and the fifth column in this
lookup table that indicate the new X and
Y of the
robot everybody see
that seems kind of strange but a very
simple way to do things so in this
lookup table they basically ran a
physical Kea around for a little bit at
random and measured the the orientation
of the robot and the values arriving at
the two motor neurons of the physical
Kea and just wrote that out into a table
so these are sort of lookup table
snapshots of the robot's physical uh
experiences table two a little bit
trickier given the robot's orientation
again its current angle in degrees Theta
and its distance from a wall whatever
the close the wall is that it's facing
when the robot is in the t- Maze no
matter what its orientation is it's
always facing a wall
somehow look up the robot's current
orientation and its current distance
from its closer closest
wall and the third and final column in
this SE table is time the time it takes
for an infrared uh signal to go out and
come back from that robot at that
orientation that far from the wall so
table two is basically containing a
simulation of the sensors table one is
containing a simulation of how the
physical robot might
move make
sense okay so we're running on a
computer we're running the neural
controller we set the the the values of
the sensor neurons according to table
two propagate the sensor neuron values
through to the motor neurons take the
motor neuron values and the state of the
simulated robot look up the new position
of the robot update the X and Y and
orientation of the robot look up its new
sensor values plug them back into the
neural controller and around and around
you
go the neural controller running on your
simulated robot that neural controller
is affecting the robot uh robots
interaction with the physics engine
which changes the input neurons in this
case same thing we're evolving neural
controllers but these neural controllers
are talking to or interacting with an
Excel
spreadsheet everybody see that okay so
when I we were talking about a simulated
tze there there isn't really a simulated
teamas there's just these tables there's
one third table which is about the light
sensor but it's more or less the same
the same
thing okay okay given all of that
information why do they not simulate why
do they teleport the robot when it the
when it enters the intersection of the
t-
maze what is it about this simulator
these tables that you can particularly
not
trust a lot of the DAT all of the data
sitting in these two tables it all came
from the physical robot but some of the
some of the data sitting in these tables
is more trustworthy than
others which data do you trust the
least
if the robot is here sitting in here
it's got its eight infrared sensors
those eight infrared sensors are sending
out signals into this environment and
we're trying to measure the time at
which those signals come back forget
about it very very tricky particularly
unreliable if the robot happens to be
sitting right here and it's actually
facing the wall we've got the
orientation of the robot uh facing the
wall and
Dy Dy here is very small the robot is
very close to the wall and it sends out
an infrared signal directly into the
wall we contrust that signal it's going
to be short and if the physical robot
does that 100 a thousand times we're
going to get more or less the same time
interval back very trustworthy if the
robot is sitting in a more complicated
environment a junction or it's facing a
piece of black cloth we can execute we
can record from the infrared sensor over
and over again and even if the robot is
still or maybe just moving a little bit
the values coming back are going to be
very very different super super
difficult to simulate these sensors when
the robot is inside the
junction so when the robot is inside the
junction I'm going to just skip ahead
for a moment when the robot is inside
the T Junction we're going to add 100%
noise at that moment when D1 is high the
robot is near the junction but the
junction it hasn't even entered the
junction yet there is no Junction
there's just this lookup table or D2 is
very low it's just entered the
junction that neural controller is still
running that neural controller still
needs values for its input
neurons for its input neurons we send in
completely random
numbers you can imagine the robots
driven into the junction and we start
dropping mirrors and cloth into the
intersection we're completely bedazzling
the robot it can't trust it's completely
disoriented when it enters the junction
we're simul ating that by returning from
this lookup table not the values in the
lookup table but completely random
values right you've been inside all day
wearing sunglasses you go out at noon
and suddenly take off your sunglasses
you're disoriented you can't really
trust your perception for a few seconds
until things settle down that's what
they're doing to the robot that's the
implementation
set make sense
okay I see a few puzzled glares any
questions before we push
on
yes great question okay so what exactly
is it about the junction that's so
problematic as you're going to see in a
moment they're going to actually
transfer this to reality so imagine a
physical teamas let's say we're were
researchers we made this out of
cardboard we cut a little hole in the
cardboard for the light to go through
the robot happens to be uh sitting right
here it's about to enter the junction
and it's its infrared sensor sends out a
a signal in this
direction maybe this outgoing infrared
pulse happens to graze the inner corner
of the cardboard and gets a little bit
corrupted maybe yes maybe no maybe it
doesn't hit the corner and keeps going
we made this thing out of cardboard out
of corrugated cardboard so maybe the
forward-facing piece of the cardboard is
completely uh flat but just behind that
that piece of the front of the cardboard
there's a little bit of corrugation
inside the cardboard it's a little
denser or a little less dense that
messes up an infrared pulse it's going
to reflect or or disperse in some Str
strange way maybe there's some dust in
there or there's the logo of the company
on the cardboard it's a little bit
darker it's a little bit lighter there's
a gazillion things that can go wrong
some of those things can also go wrong
in other parts of the maze as well but
things get really hard in here the
geometry gets a little more complicated
let's not even bother let's just
completely bedazzle the robot when it's
in the
junction so that from Evolution's
perspective
the evolution should just assume don't
rely on your sensors at all when you're
hear when you get to hear or and or you
magically are transported to
hear what does that mean what does that
mean for evolution to say it can't rely
on its
sensors to decision
based it has to real has to just do
blind Reckoning right you're stumbling
in the middle of the night to go use use
the restroom you know the layout of your
room you kind of just do everything from
rot memory and hope for the hope for the
best right your sensors aren't working
you can do it right this robot can do it
presumably hopefully that means that
when they take this physical robot and
drop it in the physical teamas there's
something about the leadup to this it's
the robot remembers that it Saw The
Light pulse about 3 seconds earlier and
the robot remembers that it's been
turning its wheels for 3 seconds since
it Saw The Light okay okay okay I should
now stop relying on my sensors and turn
either left or right and then go
straight that's in essence what we're
hoping Evolution does make sense okay as
mentioned there might be other things
about the physical Taz that are also
unreliable so they're also going to add
a little bit of noise to the Bas set
these are physical features of the
simulator the lookup tables that had
probably has some correspondence in
reality for example how does the robot
move in response to its motor signals so
in table one whenever the neural
controller look is trying to figure out
the new position of the robot this table
sends back the new X and Y position of
the robot and it randomly Alters X and Y
by a small amount by about 10% yeah okay
so that's true as the robot is driving
around its Motors aren't perfect maybe
there's a little Pebble on one of its
wheels so that it bumps a little bit as
it's driving along probably a safe
bet okay how the infrared sensors
respond in the stem or in the top of the
t- maze again maybe there's a company
logo on the cardboard so don't trust the
the time of reflection of the infrared
pulse by too much just by a little bit
and keep going okay how the ambient
light sensors respond add a little bit
of noise to the light sensors and we'll
see how things go so far so good
okay additional things that they also
modified so these uh this researcher set
a good precedent by saying be paranoid
like a good coder assume that everything
can possibly go wrong in reality so
every time they ran the robot through
this simulator they altered the side
from which the light comes this is an
important thing for the experiment
itself Flash from the left Flash from
the right the width of the corridor the
starting orientation of the robot in the
base of the t- is it pointing up and to
the left up and to the left in the tze
is it pointing up and to the right in
the tze they're varying everything the
length of the light zone how big is this
little window through which we Flash the
light the length of the
corridor when I say they varied all
these things what they ultimately did is
went back to those three lookup tables
the lookup table for movement the lookup
table for the IR sensors the lookup
table for the light sensors and they
modified things that simulated varying
these aspects of the robot in
reality so far so good
okay
okay question when do you like when do
you decide that you're like changing
enough versus that you're like changing
too many things that
like because if you change too many
things it's going to not move but if
youve changed all these things how do
you know which one
like no one has a good answer to that
question yet right how do you know when
you varied things too much you
definitely know when you varied things
too much because Evolution will not be
able to make any progress it'll evolve a
it'll evolve controllers will continue
to cause the robot to move around
randomly in the base of the Tas right
that's Evolution saying you keep
changing too many things I just don't
know what to do I don't know how to
evolve a neural controller to even
increase D1 let alone D2 or go after the
cheese so you tuned down noise and
suddenly Evolution starts to make
progress from one generation to the next
neural controllers start to evolve that
get bigger values of D1 D2 the
controllers tend to get the cheese more
often than not but maybe you've put too
little noise and will'll fail to cross
the reality Gap we're back to this uh
we're back to this Goldilocks problem
right not too little not too much but
how do you
know the answer here is they don't know
this is what they did and they managed
to evolve a controller that evolved the
ability to always turn at the top of the
teamas in the direction in which it saw
the light so what did the investigators
do cross fingers hope for the best we'll
see the result in a
moment let's have a look at the evolved
controllers looks pretty familiar from
what we've seen before here's 1 2 3 4 5
6 78 here's the eight infrared sensors
here's the one two light
sensors they impose bilateral symmetry
so they only evolved weights for the
left synapses and whatever the values
were for the left sens uh synapses they
copied those values onto the right
synapses right we've seen this before
generally speaking bilateral symmetry is
a good thing we all know that don't
Evolution doesn't have to reinvent rent
reinvent it just give it to her but
she's got to figure out which weights to
assign to these uh synapses you'll
notice that some of the synapses are
inhibitory those are the ones with white
arrow heads some of these synapses
evolved to be excitatory these are the
ones with
black uh arrow heads you'll notice that
there are some recurrent connections and
self
connections what you're looking at here
is a visualization of the most most fit
neural controller in the minimal
simulation this neural controller caused
the robot to always get the cheese no
matter which side they flashed the light
from did this neural controller evolve
to cause the robot to fall hug the wall
when it sees the light or did this
neural controller evolve to remember
where the light was and turn in that
direction when it gets to the junction
or when it gets teleported into the top
of the
te not easy to tell but you've had a few
tries at
this any hints you see here one way or
the
other uh the um two front sensors
they're they have uh they're connected
to the L the opposite left and right
motor so like if you see on the left
side the right one will spin faster so
it'll go that direction like it's
hugging the wall That's so you see that
there is an an ipsilateral connection
going from the front left infrared
sensor to the right motor and there
should be the same thing on the other
side there it is but these are the
Infrared sensors these are just the
proximity sensors the robot can only see
the light from this sensor and from this
sensor tricky light sensors like inhibit
each other ah there's a very strong hint
yeah and then they
inhibit
oppos
director yes so some good observations
in there it's a little bit strange we
see an outgoing we see outgoing synapses
that are outgoing from sensor neurons
inating or connecting to other uh sensor
neurons it's a little confusing you can
basically think of these black circles
as hidden neurons that are connected to
the the sensors little confusing you
mentioned that the two light sensors are
mutually inhibiting one another it turns
out that they didn't build this in this
is something that evolved and it is
ubiquitous in us as well there are many
many neurons and clusters of neurons in
your head and in your spine and
throughout your body that mutually
inhibit one another this is one of the
greatest hacks Mother Nature has ever
come up with and she's come up with some
amazing hacks what does mutual
inhibition
do it's often hard to see but in this
minimal
experiment it makes
sense remember when we talked about
brenberg vehicles and we kind of
mentally simulated these neural control
rollers in our head if this light sensor
fires then it it excites it
inhibits what's going on
here is it like it's focusing on that
like cutting out all other inputs it's
cutting out it's inhibiting everything
else so let's imagine this neural
controller is sitting inside the
simulated robot it starts to drive up
the stem of the tea and we Flash the
light from the right bam ambient uh this
particular sens sensor neuron uh obtains
a very high positive number and there's
a little bit of light that also falls
across the robot's body onto the other
light sensor as well but less at this
moment in time at which the right hand
light is flashing on the robot this
ambient light sensor is firing more
strongly than this ambient light sensor
and then click the light goes off what
happens
could it be one that didn't see it
becomes negative the one that doesn't
see it becomes negative becomes more
negative why well it's because the one
that saw it is inhibiting it so then
that one becomes negative and so then it
not inhibits like all the way around Mak
one more S one positive correct so this
is a tricky thing about neuroscience and
neural networks right it's a double
inhibition we've got two things that are
inhibiting one another but at a given
point in time the right hand light
sensor is stronger which means it's more
strongly inhibiting the other one so at
the moment that the light is on the the
the delta or the difference in values of
these two light sensors may be slight
they're both High because the light is
on one is a little bit stronger than the
other starts to push down this one this
one is also inhibiting this one but its
value is dropping so it's in its ability
to inhibit this one is decreasing and so
as the light switches
off this happens one goes to its maximum
positive value and the other drops to
its maximum negative value and the robot
keeps
driving what's happened what is this
Mutual inhibition done for the robot
memory memory it's remembering yeah okay
so it may or may not also be hugging the
wall or exploiting some aspect of its
interaction with the tze but this one is
definitely has evolved to remember on
which side it Saw The Light okay not
really important for the reality Gap
discussion today but just to reinforce
this idea of what's going on in the
heads of these
robots okay here we we go all this build
up for this I'm going to turn off the
light for a
moment okay here we go 1997 no fancy
cameras this is the best we get no
YouTube videos what's
happening it's doing pretty well it's
doing pretty well right that should be
the first obvious thing they stuck a
little uh a little LED on top of the
robot and they shielded that led so that
the ambient light sensors couldn't see
it it was just for the camera person
from above what else what other
observations can you take away from this
attempt to cross the reality
Gap it doesn't seem to be hugging the
wall it doesn't seem to be hugging the
wall so if it's exploiting its
interaction with the environment it's
subtle it's something that's beyond us
to see it may or may
not it's definitely remembering as we
just saw what else is going
on someone else almost looks like
it's wall yep so it's exactly remember
that when it gets into the intersection
it's probably kind of it's the neural
controller is not relying on its current
sensory information how this neural
controller evolve to ignore the incoming
sensory information in those situations
that's tricky and complex you'll just
have to trust me there's a way that
neural controllers can do this in the
same way that they can remember things
they can also inhibit or ignore their
current sensory information and drive
their Motors just from internal
memory so the again this is like us
stumbling around in the middle of the
night right they go a little bit too far
but then they still manage to remember
enough to know in which direction to
turn in fact they remembered which they
know which direction to turn in in every
case at least all the ones that the
investigators reported what else is
happening what else did they test here
the investigators different starting
different starting positions so you can
see down here they tested the robot in
this t- maze starting from two different
initial
positions and at two different
orientations and even though they were
varying the initial conditions of the
physical robot it's in all of those
cases this evolved neural controller
could handle
it C crazy simple robot crazy simple
experiment but this feels like a pretty
trustworthy robot it doesn't guarantee
that there isn't some teamas and some
situation in which it's going to go
Haywire but pretty good what else did
the investigators do on the other side
of the reality Gap
here absolutely remember in simulation
they were V among other things they were
varying the width of the Tas so they
wanted to to test that in reality did
that altering the width make this neural
controller robust to the width of the
Maze and the answer is
yes any other
observations they they reset it every
time right so every time it gets the
cheese they take it and put it back at
the bottom of the stem of the
teamas
okay okay doesn't look like much but
this was the beginning of at least in
I'm going to turn the light back on in
the case of a simple robot you can cross
the Gap it's not the Gap is can be large
but it's not infinite there are ways to
train or design robots and simulation
that transfer to reality so everyone got
very excited about this experiment when
it came out and I was just starting as a
master student in this lab at Sussex
when this all started there was a lot of
excitement that it was possible
if only we could have better simulators
than these bloody lookup tables this is
ridiculous this isn't going to get us
very far in 1999 in the UK a games
company visited some of the roboticists
at Sussex and said hey we're making
these new things called physics engines
would they be of any use to you and we
all said oh my gosh yes thank thank
goodness for this so the rest of what
we're going to see in this section and
as we've already seen in most of this
course we're going to now look at
physics engines we've got 8 minutes left
so we'll start in on the second attempt
to cross the reality Gap in 1997 we
learned that okay you can sprinkle noise
but you got to know what to sprinkle
noise on okay okay all right still not a
very satisfying answer can we do better
can we automate things
more in 20003 years later there was a
publication in nature magazine of a
second attempt to cross the reality Gap
and this got quite a bit of media
tension it ended up on the front page of
the New York Times in August and the
scientist uh the rep the journalists
reported that scientists had made the
first robot that makes its own robots
right here we go Terminators coming it's
the end of the world great science
journalism on the front page of the New
York Times
obviously crossing the reality Gap isn't
something that's going to make it onto
the front page of the New York Times the
way in which these researchers attempted
to cross the reality Gap made use of a
new technology that excited and scared
the hell out of a lot of
people it wasn't a physics engine
although that was also new in this
experiment there was one other thing
that was new in this
experiment that scared the hell out of
everybody any
ideas here's the physical robot all the
white parts of the robot that you see
here are made from thermoplastic it's a
particular type of plastic that has a
very low melting point so in 2000 there
were also manufacturing firms that were
starting to make these new things called
3D printers they they came to see these
researchers at the time and said do you
have any use for these 3D printers and
these researchers said you know what if
it's difficult to cross the reality Gap
we evolve something in simulation and
transfer it to reality and it doesn't
work okay maybe we can't always
guarantee that everything will cross the
Gap but if we make or evolve a whole
bunch of things in simulation and make
not just one robot but hundreds or
thousands of millions of robots some of
them presumably by chance will cross the
reality Gap
but who wants to sit down and manually
build hundreds or thousands or millions
of robots wouldn't it be great if there
was a machine a robot that could make
robots
automatically so what became known as
the Golem project was an attempt to
cross the reality Gap by bringing
together two new technologies evolve
robots in physics engines evolve lots of
robots in physics engines and then print
a whole bunch of them in reality with
the hope that some will cross the Gap
okay again the the SC the reporters were
referring to robots making robots which
is a topic we will actually come back to
later in this course where we're going
to look at self-replicating machines
this is an idea that was actually
formulated by John Von noyman uh just
after the second world war we'll talk
about that in a moment this is the what
you're going to see at the moment are
not self-replicating machines at least
not yet you're going to see 3D printers
that make robots not robots that make
robots Okay so this experiment this
attempt to cross the reality Gap this
experiment is made up of three different
Steps step number one evolve a robot not
a robot
controller several things that are new
in this experiment the first one is that
they're evolving not just the brain of
the robot but they're also olving the
body of the robot uh we're approaching
the end of this course as we continue on
you're going to see more and more
experiments in which the investigators
are going to broaden The evolutionary
algorithm so now it's not just
optimizing synaptic weights for a fixed
neural controller for a fixed robot it's
going to The evolutionary algorithm is
going to start to Tinker with body and
brain uh simultaneously here's we're
going to see an example of that
here once they evolve the body and brain
of a virtual robot send that body and
brain to a 3D printer which will
manufacture the robot and then step
three in 2000 these 3D printers could
only print plastic so we could only
manufacture parts of the robot and then
we're going to manually snap in all the
parts that 3D printers at that time
could not print which were Motors and
electronics okay our focus of course is
on step one here how did they actually
evolve these robots they evolve these
robots with an evolutionary algorithm
we've seen many here's another one in
this case the genotype is uh a list
that's made up of four lists this is the
blueprint the blueprint is a list of
four
lists the first list is a list of
vertices it's a list of
triplets where those triplets
specify the links or the parts of the
robot each ball here has an X Y and Z
coordinate in three-dimensional space
mutations in this evolutionary algorithm
can add triplets or remove triplets from
this list so we can add or remove parts
to the robot's body the second list is a
list of one two three four quadruplets
or four
tupal each four tupal describes a bar a
bar connects some vertex of the robot to
some other ver vertex that makes up the
robot and we have a relaxed length and a
stiffness for that
bar that language should sound familiar
where have we heard that language
before there's a spring so you don't see
the spring in this picture but you can
imagine that every bar connects a pair
of vertices together we cut each bar in
half and stick a spring in the Middle
with a given relaxed length and a given
stick
so far so good okay so these first two
lists tell us how to build the body of
the
robot the second two lists tell us how
to build the brain of the
robot the second uh the second or sorry
the the third list here is a list of
neurons in that list if there are n
entries in that list there are n neurons
inside that robot each the description
of each neuron there's a threshold
associated with each neuron that should
also sound familiar threshold of
what what do we threshold in a
neuron activation the activation
function right so as always the neuron
is getting some raw weighted sum and
then we're going to threshold it somehow
an evolution is going to set that
threshold and every neuron is followed
by a list of synapse coefficients this
is a synonym for synaptic weights every
neuron is going to send out synapses
that connect to every other neuron in
the neurons list so we end up with a
fully connected neural network like you
see here we've got one minute left the
fourth and final list is a list of
actuators each actuator is described by
three numbers the first number indicates
which bar uh which bar is the neuron
attached to and which is the actuator
attached to and which neuron does it
attach to so an actuator is connecting a
neuron to a
bar which turns that neuron into a motor
neuron that's sending a value to the
spring inside that bar and that value is
going to tell the motor inside that
spring whether to extend that string
that spring or compress that spring we
have a genotype that encodes the body
and brain of a robot we'll pause there
for today you have a quiz due tonight
undergrads your working on assignment 10
grads you're waiting for me to drop D5
which I will do at 3M thank you